Common Trees of Indiana State Parks 
DNR 
Indiana Deptartment of Natural Resources Division of State Parks interpretiveservices.IN.gov
The mission of the Interpretive Services is to provide in- formation and offer interpretive experiences with Indiana’s natural and cultural resources to visitors, staff and a di- verse public

Simple Untoothed Leaves
Eastern Redbud In April and May, the redbud’s clusters of bright pink flowers add a touch of color to the springtime woods. The redbud is a small tree, common to the understory of our forests. Its heart-shaped leaves and flattened fruit pods make it an easy tree to identify. Flowering Dogwood In the springtime, the soft white “blossoms” of the flowering dog- wood add a fringe of white to many forest edges. The leaves are opposite and oval in shape. The wood is heavy, hard and strong, and is used to make items such as golf club heads. The dogwood’s fruits are bright red and arranged in tight clusters. Pawpaw Although tasty and edible, the pawpaw’s ripened fruits are of- ten difficult to find, since they are eaten by many forest animals. This small tree forms colonies or “paw- paw patches” by sprouting new trees from the roots of older trees. When crushed, the large leaves have a strong odor. Persimmon Persimmon fruit gatherers soon learn to recognize the unique bark with its square plates. The leathery, dark green leaves are shiny above and pale below

Lobed Leaves 
Red Oak Like the acorns of the white oak, red oak acorns are eaten by deer, squirrels and raccoons. To humans, the acorns of the red oak are bitter and must be leached of the tannin before use. The leaves of the red oak have sharp pointed lobes with bristles at the tips. Like the white oak, the red oak is also an important lumber tree. Sassafras Four different shapes of leaves can be found on most sassafras trees. Sassafras tea is brewed from the tree roots. An oil dis- tilled from the bark is used to flavor candies and medicine, and to perfume soap. When scratched, the young twigs have a pleasant spicy odor. Sugar Maple The results of boiling the sugar maple’s sap is maple syrup and sugar. Colonists learned this use from Native Ameri- cans. Each tree yields be- tween 5 to 60 gallons of sap per year, and it takes between 30 to 40 gallons of sap to make just one gallon of syrup. Sugar maple wood is often used in furniture
Sycamore These trees are found abun- dantly around lakes and along many streams. The mottled bark (which looks sick) is light brown, pale green and white on top. The leaves vary in size, but are always quite broad with curving tips. Round balls hanging on long stems throughout the winter are the fruit of this tree. Tulip Tree Growing to be one of the tallest and finest trees in the eastern United States, the tulip tree is our Indiana state tree. Although sometimes called the “Yellow Poplar,” this tree is actually in the Magnolia family. The name “Tulip Tree” comes from the showy blos- soms’ resemblance to tulips. The tall straight trunk of this tree made it popular among pio- neers for log cabin building. Today, the easily worked wood is used for furniture, toys, musi- cal instruments and many other articles. White Oak White oak acorns are an important source of food for many woodland animals, and were once ground into a flour and used by Native Americans. The white oak’s wood is an important source of lumber for tight barrels, furniture and hardwood flooring. The leaves of the white oak have rounded lobes

Needle-like Leaves 
Eastern Red Cedar The red cedar is a widely dis- tributed tree in Indiana be- cause many birds eat the berries and then naturally dis- perse the seeds later. They are among the first trees to grow in abandoned farm fields. The bark is “shreddy” in appearance. The heart- wood is red with the familiar cedar chest smell. The wood is rot resistant and is used for posts on many farms. Red Pine The red pine gets its name from its red- dish-brown bark. It is often used as an or- namental tree and like the white pine, it is an important lumber tree. The dark green needles of red pine are 4 to 6 inches long and are arranged in bundles of two. White Pine The tall, straight trunks of the white pine were once prized for ship masts. Today, the white pine is still an impor- tant lumber tree. The long, soft nee- dles of the white pine are arranged in bundles of five. The cone is long, slen- der and unique because of its white, resin-tipped scales

Compound Leaves 
Black Locust Black locust has compound leaves with 7 to 17 leaflets, about 8 to 10 inche long that are arranged alternate- ly on the twigs. Pairs of thorns, 1/2-inch long, occur at each point where a leaf stem joins the twig. The bark on older trees is dark and strongly ridged, with deep fissures between the ridges. The fruit is a brown to to black flat pod. Black locust is one of the most used woods in fireplaces. Black Walnut In autumn, you have to be quick to gather the fruit of this tree before they are eaten by squirrels and mice. The leaves are 1 to 2 feet long and com- posed of 13 to 23 narrow leaf- lets. The walnuts, crushed stems and leaves have a strong spicy smell. A valuable lumber tree, the wood is of- ten used for fine cabinets and gun stocks. Shagbark Hickory This is the tree with the stout twigs and gray shabby bark that is so common in wood- ed areas. Many birds search behind the loose strips of bark for insects, and some- times bats hide there during the day. The nuts of the shagbark hickory are eaten by forest wildlife and humans alike
Staghorn Sumac This sumac gets its name from its velvety twigs, which re- semble the velvet on a stag’s antlers. The staghorn sumac is a small tree, common in many abandoned fields and open areas of Indiana. The red fruit was used to make a tart sum- mer drink by Native Americans and pioneers. White Ash Since most wooden sports equip- ment is ash, this tree could be called the athletes’ tree. The leaves are 8 to 12 inches long and have 5 to 9 stalked leaf- lets. The seeds have an at- tached wing, so they fall slowly to the ground like one-bladed propellers

Simple Toothed Leaves 
American Beech The smooth, silver-gray bark of the beech makes it an especially easy tree to identify. Sometimes this bark wrinkles and looks similar to elephant skin. Unfortunately, this unique bark is often covered with carved initials. The carvings pro- vide a site for fungus and damaging insects to enter the tree’s trunk. The leaves are thin and paepery in texture
Black Cherry In late summer, many birds cease all other eating habits to gorge themselves on the ripe fruit of the black cherry. To humans, the fruit tastes somewhat bitter, but is often used for jellies and jams. The leaves are lance-shaped with small teeth on the edges and are firm in texture. Cottonwood Its bright green leaves have an al- most triangular shape. A close relative is the swamp cotton- wood. It can be distinguished by its more oval leaves with round leaf stems, and by the wooly appearance of the new leaves, leaf stems and twigs. The young bark is smooth and yellow-green; the old bark is rough, with thick, flat ridges. Slippery Elm The slippery elm’s name comes from its wet and slippery inner bark. The slippery inner layer has been used to treat coughs, sore throats and as a poultice for sores. The leaves are oval in shape, but the two sides are not equal. The leaves are tough and hairy above and velvety below

